#summary thinking aloud posted to django-users
#labels Featured

I'm a big believer in a step-by-step approach so I was going to  
postpone support for deferred sending (e.g. send this email out at  
3am tomorrow morning), recurring email (e.g. password change  
reminders) and for box-carring (i.e. putting multiple notifications  
in a single email) until later releases -- especially as I believe  
these can be cleanly layered on top of the basic functionality.

With these features initially removed, the models I have in mind is  
fairly straight forward.

The main model will just be a queue of fully resolved messages to  
send as soon as possible. By "fully resolved" I mean that any  
template processing will take place before the message gets added to  
this model. So, in other words, the model will contain the literal  
to, from, subject and message body as well as a datetime of when the  
message was added to the queue. I'm also thinking of a three-way  
priority -- high, medium, low (see below for what this means).

I'm thinking of implementing the "don't send" list at this level, so  
even if you put an email to someone in this low-level queue, it won't  
get sent if the email address is on the don't send list. From  
experience, it's worth implementing this kind of opt-out support  
right from the beginning, so the initial version will have this  
second model, a simple list of email address not to send to, perhaps  
along with a datetime of when the opt-out was added.

The third model for this initial version is a log. Regardless of  
whether a send succeeds or not, it is logged in this model. A  
separate process can be responsible for retries, rolling to file- 
based logs, archiving or whatever. I am inclined to include  
everything in this model that is included in the first model  
(including the message body). In additional there would be a datetime  
of when the send was attempted, a status code and some free-text  
field to capture an exception.

I believe that all other features including retries, deferral and box- 
carring can be implemented on top of this layer with little or no  
modification.

One thing I haven't thought enough about is how this bottom layer  
would handle (or integrate with handling of) mail delivery failures  
that come back as email (rather than exceptions thrown by SMTP  
subsystem). Things to consider are how to correlate the mail delivery  
failure email and exactly what to correlate it with (the entry in the  
log model?)

One thing the above models do not consider is the possibility of  
multiple queues. I'm calling YAGNI on that at the moment.

So there would need to be one process that, when invoked would simply  
go through the queue, attempting to send each email (after checking  
the don't send list) and logging the result.

My thoughts about priorities are that the "sender process" should  
first go through any "high" priority sorted by age (how long they'd  
been in the queue), then any "medium" sorted by age, then any "low"  
similarly sorted by age.

Finally there should be a view and template for showing basic status  
of the django-mailer system.

Obviously later releases will add functionality on top, mostly  
concerned with how to get things in the queue and when to put them  
there.

So my initial plan is to implement what I've described above.

But there needs to still be, for the system to be usable for more  
than just one-off emails to individuals, a basic mechanism for adding  
bulk mail to the queue. The simplest case is one where an identical  
(i.e. no templating) text email is sent to all users. Adding  
templating support is only a small step from that, assuming that the  
template just receives a user object in the context. Then what is  
needed is a query set of what users to mail to. So bulk email is  
achieved by running a choice of query set + template and adding each  
result to the message queue in the layer described above.

So after a first pass of the lowest layer (described above) is done,  
I plan to add this kind of bulk email support per the previous  
paragraph.